---
title: What I Know About Internships
description: Random recruiting advice from a questionable source (me)
tags: internships
date: 2024-03-28
---

## Introduction

I get asked a lot about internship recruiting from incoming first-year students.
I had a lot of struggles in figuring out what to do myself, and I figured a
guide like this would be of great benefit for the broader community. This will
probably be a pretty boring read since the process is pretty straightforward,
but I'll try to keep things interesting.

Firstly, start considering what companies look for in candidates. In particular,
companies are looking for above-average candidates who have significant
foundational knowledge and demonstrated interest in the industry.

So what can you do to stand out? There are several pillars that need to be
tackled:

- Academics: demonstrates foundational knowledge and baseline for intelligence
- Extracurriculars and projects: can ship products and improve on existing
  codebases
- Interviewing and soft skills: enough algorithmic intuition and drive in order
  to succeed on the job, even without prior experience with the underlying
  technologies

And from my experience, this has been true for internships in general. So, the
earlier you finish all three of these pillars, the faster you will be on your
career journey!

## Addressing the Three Pillars

You could probably address these all in the summer before school starts. Take a
month to do all your projects, and in that time frame, probably set aside some
time for Leetcode or the like. Also, it will be good for your mentality entering
college. Side Note: I would also recommend picking up reading before you enter
college. [Atomic Habits](https://amzn.to/3xcjxGW) is good for starters.

### Academics

The easiest pillar to address is coursework. You just click a button to sign up
for the hardest course you can take (also with the goal of maximizing your
degree completion). In particular, as many of the following:

- Data Structures
- Algorithms
- Discrete Math
- Operating Systems
- Computer Architecture

A good target is $\geq 3$ of these courses by the end of the year. I took Data
Structures, and Discrete Math in the Fall and then Computer Architecture in the
Spring. I also put which courses I was taking on my resume to show it would be
completed before the internship.

### Extracurriculars and Projects

This depends on the role: most backend roles look for Node.js, Python and most
front-end projects use React.js. When I interviewed, these were the most popular
ones and therefore were the ones I learned.

Just watch some Youtube here and there on building some projects. By the end of
it all, you should be able to create (or know you can create) a Twitter clone
without any real troubles. In fact, I would say that it should feel like a
typing contest (there's barely any thought involved in making a Twitter clone).

On the frontend side, I would recommend using Next.js as a framework, and
learning Tailwind since it makes projects go by faster when you're adding
styles. CSS takes a horribly long time to write and it's always great to just
write stuff like `m-2 flew flex-col max-7-xl w-full` instead opening up another
file and typing 15 lines of CSS (and also figuring out what everything is
called). The other benefit is that you can read Tailwind inline styles without
saying "WTF!" (Tailwind is hilariously incomprehensible to non-users).

Some good ideas are to implement games (maybe Monopoly, Poker) and integrate a
multiplayer feature. Ideally, also with social login (e.g. Google, Discord).
It's pretty straightforward with libraries like `next-auth`.

### Interviewing

Getting a good grasp on Leetcode-y style questions is fundamental. If you did
USACO in high school and reached Gold, you'll be fine for nearly all companies.
Otherwise, pack your bags and go Leetcode until you can solve mediums at a rate
of $\geq 60\%$ (I also don't really have a good idea of the Leetcode
difficulties, but this number is my estimate).

The other types of question that sometimes gets asked is system design.
Understand microservices, monoliths, and other common methods used in industry,
e.g. A/B testing, search, connections with other APIs, etc. This should come up
if you're doing good projects though, and naturally you should be able to answer
these.

Finally, do some behavioral preparation and try to talk about your experiences
succinctly and clearly. Communication and the way you come across is one of the
more important parts in the interview ("vibes" are pretty important), and so
having an edge in this area helps a lot. You should have answers to the common
questions, e.g. "tell me about yourself, what's a time you've faced a challenge,
etc."

## Other Stuff

At this point, there should be a high-level overview on what items need to be
done. Having this done before school starts should be a major goal. Here's all
the other stuff you'll also need to do (again, ideally before school starts). I
don't know what's popular now but I wouldn't expect it to change too much.

The most important one is an updated 1-page resume with your education, courses
taken, experiences, and awards. It's fairly easy to update this too. Asking
upperclassmen to look at their resumes is helpful, or you can do some LinkedIn
stalking. For awards, I would recommend putting anything that shows your
abilities in computer science - projects, competitions, awards, research, prior
work experience, etc. but don’t be overly verbose since you’ll have limited
space on your resume. Try to keep each experience from 3-5 bulleted lines. Keep
items like USACO, USAMO, AIME, FIRST and other respectable activities—remove
items like NHS, etc.

The second thing you'll want is a list of projects and experiences that you can
talk about in your behavioral. Usually, you can just use your resume, but this
is particularly helpful for company-specific questions and questions to ask the
interviewer.

Finally, I recommend applying early and "shotgunning" applications. Most people
need to apply to 100+ companies to receive an offer, and the earlier you apply,
the better. So, try to hit 100 applications in the first several weeks of school
to maximize the chances of landing an offer. It's easy to see why this is the
case: let's suppose that you have a $1\%$ chance at each company you apply to.
Then, there's still a $0.99^{100} \approx 36.6\%$ chance you won't have a job
(not to discourage you, just realistically speaking). Side note: this assumes
iid applications, which is not true since there is likely a correlation between
applications.

## Timeline

Ok great! So now, you've done all these preparation steps, and now are ready to
interview. At this point, you should have a resume prepared and several projects
and experiences that you can talk about during your interviews.

I started applying as soon as school started, but I don't think this is always
necessary. During school, interviews should take place. Find some time
in-between classes to take your interview. Take it easy—your preparation should
have been more than enough and you can show up to the interview in casual gear
(I usually had a hoodie on). Generally the interview process for a typical
software companies is as follows:

1. Submit resume via some online application portal
2. Receive some recruiter follow-up, maybe a phone screen
3. Take a technical assessment usually via Hackerrank or CodeSignal
4. Receive a virtual on-site round (sometimes after a phone screen)
5. The on-site round usually will consist of a technical and a behavioral
   portion each lasting roughly an hour. This is usually the final round unless
   otherwise stated.
6. Offer! (hopefully)

## Concluding Thoughts

Take it easy, and be realistic in your expectations. There's a lot of emphasis
placed on internships, and while they are good for you, there is also (and
potentially more) value in doing other options such as research instead. Don't
be discouraged! As long as your first summer is being utilized well, it will all
work out in the end :)
